URL=https://www.bis.org/review/r021028a.htm
PDF_URL=https://www.bis.org/review/r021028a.pdf
TITLE=Alan Greenspan: Productivity
SHORT_INFO=Speech by Mr Alan Greenspan  Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System  at the US Department of Labor and American Enterprise Institute Conference  Washington  D.C.  23 October 2002.

Alan Greenspan: Productivity Speech by Mr Alan Greenspan  Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System  at the US Department of Labor and American Enterprise Institute Conference  Washington  D.C.  23 October 2002. The increase in nonfarm business output per hour over the past year will almost surely be reported as one of the largest advances  if not the largest  posted over the past thirty years. We at the Federal Reserve  along with our colleagues in government and the private sector  are struggling to account for so strong a surge. We would not be particularly puzzled if the increases in output per hour were occurring during a period of very rapid economic growth  such as has often attended recoveries from steep recessions. Historically  such recoveries have allowed overhead and maintenance employee hours to be spread over a rapidly increasing level of production. But during the past year we averaged only modest economic growth. The reported estimates of output per hour do not appear to have resulted principally from faulty data or measurement error. Whether output is measured from the expenditure side or from the independently estimated income side of the national accounts  and whether hours of work are measured from the survey of establishments or the survey of households  the same basic result is clearly evident: an impressive gain in output per hour over the past year. This conclusion is buttressed by recent sizable increases estimated for labor productivity for the manufacturing sector  derived from a data system that  for the most part  is independent of the national accounts. To be sure  because the productivity feast of recent quarters has been so difficult to explain  many analysts expect a productivity famine in the period ahead. Others  however  are not so pessimistic. Regardless of how events unfold  we will need to confront difficult questions posed by the recent performance of productivity  if we are to properly evaluate economic developments going forward. Indeed  if the recent surge in measured productivity is not a statistical mirage  or if it is not expunged by data revisions  then we need to ask about its possible causes. Clearly  over the past year corporate managers  confronted with tepid demand and a virtual disappearance of pricing power  have struggled to maintain profit margins. With price increases largely off the table and demand soft  lowered costs have become the central focus of achieving increased profitability. On a consolidated basis for the corporate sector as a whole  lowered costs are generally associated with increased output per hour. Much of the recent reported improvements in cost control doubtless have reflected the paring of so called "fat" in corporate operations--fat that accumulated during the long expansion of the 1990s when management attention was focused primarily on the perceived profitability of expansion and less on the increments to profitability that derive from cost savings.1 Managers  now refocused  are pressing hard to identify and eliminate those redundant or non-essential activities that accumulated in the boom years. Now  with margins under pressure  businesses effectively have been reorganizing work processes and re-allocating resources so as to use them more productively. Moreover  for capital with active secondary markets  such as computers and networking equipment  productivity may also have been boosted by a reallocation to firms that could use the equipment more efficiently. For example  healthy firms reportedly have been buying equipment from failed dot-coms. Businesses also may have managed to eke out increases in output per hour by employing their existing workforce more intensively. Unlike cutting fat  which permanently elevates the levels of productivity  these gains in output per hour are often temporary  as more demanding workloads eventually begin to tax workers and impede efficiency. 1 There are those who point out  quite correctly  that a significant part of the output of the late 1990s was wasted in a misallocation of capital to pie-in-the-sky ventures. But that output was misused does not subtract from the evident capacity to produce that output  and it is this that our measures of structural productivity attempt to capture. BIS Review 61/2002 1 Perhaps the return to a low-inflation environment in recent years in itself explains the intensification of competitive pressures  which has been a spur to the growth of productivity. Indeed  the data do suggest a relationship between inflation and productivity growth over the long run. But that statistical relationship is modest at best and inferring causality is complicated by a circularity that arises because increased growth in output per hour depresses unit labor costs and  hence  prices. Taken at face value  historical relationships suggest low inflation would explain very little of the most recent surge in output per hour. To be sure  while lack of pricing power and associated competitive pressures may have initiated much of the cost cutting and organizational changes that have occurred  it will ultimately be the quantity of fat in the system and the opportunities for productive reorganization that will determine the potential gains in productivity. Only in retrospect  if then  will we be able to ascertain how much of the past year's elevated growth in output per hour was transitory--that is  growth that resulted from cutting of fat  reorganizing operations  and more fully exploiting technologies already embedded in the existing capital stock. Such improvements  even though they are long-lasting  are  of course  a level adjustment with no necessary implications for productivity growth going forward. Moreover  there is an upper limit to the amount of output that can be produced from an existing facility  even in the short run  no matter how intensively it is employed and how much fat is taken out of the system. Corporate management can not unendingly reduce cost without at some point curtailing output or embodying new technologies through investment to sustain it. The recent upsurge in the growth of output per hour has understandably renewed interest in the relationship between investment and so-called adjustment costs. Firms do not necessarily reap the full benefits of their capital investments immediately because of the disruptions to activity that can be initially created when new equipment is installed; these disruptions may include learning to use the new equipment and software or getting the new machines to mesh with existing systems. Thus  although capital investment ultimately boosts output per hour  these adjustment costs temper the initial benefits to increased production obtained from new investment. It is likely that as capital spending fell over the past couple of years  so did the disruptions that accompanied its installation. Moreover  the dislocations associated with the substantial investment of the late 1990s and 2000 also likely were waning. This lower level of disruption provides a boost to growth in output per hour for a time. How much remains an open question. The quantitative evidence on the magnitude of this effect spans the range from significant to small.2 The ability of businesses to boost productivity with what seems to be minimal new capital investment over the past two years suggests that output per hour growth in the later years of the 1990s likely trailed the growth in underlying productivity in those years. If this inference is accurate  part of that earlier growth in underlying productivity is being reflected in today's gains in output per hour. The difficulty in explaining the recent past is most evident when we decompose gains in output per hour into the contribution from changes in worker quality  the amount of capital used by workers--that is  capital deepening--and the contribution from all other factors  a notion that economists label "multifactor productivity." By definition  multifactor productivity technical change  organizational improvements  cyclical factors  and myriad other influences on output per hour  apart from capital investment. With capital spending sluggish over the past year  and no evident acceleration of worker quality  it is likely that growth of multifactor productivity accounts for an appreciable portion of the rise in output per hour. Based on historical experience  it seems improbable that all of the large rise in multifactor productivity could be attributed to cyclical or transitory factors. Conversely  it seems very unlikely that all of the increase in the growth of productivity could be attributed to structural influences. The truth  presumably  lies between these two extremes  but where has yet to be determined. At minimum  however  it seems reasonable to conclude that the step-up in the pace of structural productivity growth that occurred in the latter part of the 1990s has not  as yet  faltered. includes 2 Susanto Basu  John Fernald  and Matthew Shapiro  in their paper "Productivity Growth in the 1990s: Technology  Utilization  or Adjustment? " Carnegie Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy  (April 2001) pp. 117-165  find significant effects. Frank Lichtenberg  in his paper "Estimation of the Internal Adjustment Costs Model Using Longitudinal Establishment Data " Review of Economics and Statistics  vol. 70 (1988)  pp. 421-430  finds much smaller effects. 2 BIS Review 61/2002 Indeed  high growth of productivity over the past year merely extends recent experience. Over the past seven years  output per hour has been growing at an annual rate of more than 2-1/2 percent  on average  compared with a rate of roughly 1-1/2 percent during the preceding two decades. Although we cannot know with certainty until the books are closed  the growth of productivity since 1995 appears to be among the largest in decades. Our nation has had previous concentrated bursts of technological innovation. In those instances  business practices slowly adapted to take advantage of the new technologies. The result was an outsized increase in the level of productivity spread over a decade or two  with unusually rapid growth rates observed during the transition to the higher level. For example  as the benefits that attended the development of the electric dynamo and the internal combustion engine more than a century ago became manifest in both the capital stock and the organization of production  the growth of labor productivity surged. From an average annual rate of 1- 3/4 percent in the late nineteenth and early twentieth century  it jumped to a 3-3/4 percent rate in the decade following World War I. Subsequently  productivity growth returned to a 1-3/4 percent pace. Then  for the quarter century following World War II  productivity growth rose to an average rate of 2- 3/4 percent before subsiding to a pace of 1-1/2 percent annually from the mid-1970s to the mid- 1990s.3 Arguably  the pickup in productivity growth since 1995 largely reflects the ongoing incorporation of innovations in computing and communications technologies into the capital stock and business practices. Indeed  the transition to the higher permanent level of productivity associated with these innovations is likely not yet completed. Surveys of purchasing managers in recent quarters consistently indicate that an appreciable share reports that their firms still have a considerable way to go in achieving the desired efficiency from the application of technology to supply management. If the backlog of unexploited long-term profitable technologies remains high  it should be assumed that once currently elevated risk premiums and the heightened cost of equity capital (and some debt) recedes  or cash flows expand  new productivity- enhancing capital investment will pick up. Further evidence that firms still have not fully adapted their operations to the latest state of technology also is provided in a recent study4 that attempts to measure the "technological gap"--that is  the difference between the productivity of leading-edge capital and the average productivity embodied in the current capital stock. This gap is estimated to be quite wide currently  which suggests that there are still significant opportunities for firms to upgrade the quality of their technology and with it the level of productivity. The paper presented by Stephen Oliner and Dan Sichel this morning also provides a basis for arguing that a significant portion--and possibly all--of the productivity revival of the mid-1990s is sustainable. Based on an analysis of a multisector growth model  their work suggests that a range for sustainable growth in labor productivity over the next decade is 2 percent to 2-3/4 percent per year. Jorgenson  Ho  and Stiroh use a similar methodology and find a range from a little less than 1-1/2 percent to about 3 percent with a central tendency of around 2-1/4 percent.5 These estimates are clearly plausible  but history does raise some warning flags concerning the length of time that productivity growth continues elevated. Gains in productivity remained quite rapid for years after the innovations that followed the surge of inventions a century ago. But in other episodes  the period of elevated growth of productivity was shorter. Regrettably  examples are too few to generalize. 3 In contrast to the boom in productivity after World War I  which many economists associate with a few key innovations  analysts usually ascribe the post-World War II boom to innovations in many sectors reflecting the diffusion through the private economy of (a) new technologies that appeared in the 1930s but were not fully implemented during the Depression  and (b) a gradual application to civilian activities of military-related innovations. Sectors with major innovations included electronics  chemicals  pharmaceuticals  and transportation (jet travel). 4 Jason G. Cummins and Giovanni L. Violante  "Investment-Specific Technical Change in the United States (1947-2000): Measurement and Macroeconomic Consequences " Review of Economic Dynamics  vol. 5 (April 2002)  pp. 243-284. 5 Dale W. Jorgenson  Mun S. Ho  and Kevin J. Stiroh  "Projecting Productivity Growth: Lessons from the U.S. Growth Resurgence " Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Economic Review  Third Quarter 2002  p. 1-13. BIS Review 61/2002 3 Hence  policymakers have no substitute for continued close surveillance of the evolution of this current period of significant innovation. In summary then: given the difficult adjustments that our economy has been undergoing  long-term productivity optimism may currently seem a bit out of place. It may appear even more so in the months ahead should output per hour soften following this period of outsized gains. Nevertheless  it is both remarkable and encouraging that  despite all that has transpired over the past couple of years  a significant step-up in the growth of productivity appears to have persisted. William J McDonough: Promoting financial resilience Remarks by Mr William J McDonough  President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York  at the Cato Institute’s 20th Annual Monetary Conference on “International Financial Crises: What Role for Government?” cosponsored with The Economist  New York  17 October 2002. Good morning. It is a pleasure to have the opportunity to join you on the occasion of this timely conference  and to share with you my thoughts on promoting financial resilience. Despite the fact that periodic surges in volatility are a fact of life in financial markets  I think there is general acknowledgment that recent years have been extraordinary in this regard. This has been a period of historic change and remarkable volatility in markets  going well beyond the emerging markets  and carrying with it important implications for political  social  and institutional stability in significant segments of the globe. The experiences of recent years have reinforced old lessons and brought home new insights about maintaining financial stability and sustained growth. In particular  a broad consensus continues to develop on ways of strengthening the institutional framework at the national and international level to create more robust  and thus more crisis-resistant  economies. There is general agreement that in order for countries to enjoy sustained and stable growth  the following are crucial: G G a sound and stable macroeconomic environment  and well-functioning and robust financial systems in both capital-exporting and capital- importing countries. Moreover  both of these are most effective when supported by a dynamic and adaptive policy regime. • The simple reality is that countries with robust financial systems  strong fiscal accounts  low inflation  credible and coherent monetary and exchange rate policies  moderate external and internal indebtedness  reasonable current accounts  and adequate domestic savings rates are less likely to be buffeted by financial and economic turbulence. Moreover  when shocks do occur  such countries tend to be far more resilient. There is also considerable agreement on many of the elements needed to achieve these goals. This agreement has been reflected  in part  in the development and promulgation of globally accepted standards and codes for best practices in areas ranging from transparency in fiscal  monetary  and financial policies  to public debt management  and core principles for bank supervision. Guiding themes across these various standards have included the importance of consistent disclosure practices and of building stability up from the firm and sector level. The latter is accomplished by encouraging sound risk management and stronger balance sheets  and creating efficient systems of market  legal  and regulatory discipline. But the learning process continues. For example  in this country  recent experiences have brought to light the need to do more to strengthen corporate accounting and disclosure standards  particularly with regard to guarantees and complex financial arrangements  such as those funded offshore or through special-purpose entities. 4 BIS Review 61/2002 Our ongoing efforts to revise the Basel Capital Accord also reflect a learning process. We embarked on this voyage in the late 1990s because we realized that the original 1988 Basel Accord had been overtaken by advances in the financial sector – and in the broader economy. While the 1988 Accord represented an important advance  new technology  the globalization of financial markets  and innovative financial products and services have changed the way that banks monitor and manage credit  market  and operational risks in a manner that the 1988 Accord could not anticipate and does not address. To ensure that the New Accord remains flexible  forward-looking  and appropriate for the risks and capital needs of internationally active banks of the twenty-first century  the Basel Committee established several goals for its work  goals that the industry has embraced. G G G G First  we intended to develop a framework that encompasses the "three pillars" necessary to support an effective system of regulatory capital: the appropriate measurement and minimum requirements  supervisory review  and market discipline. Second  we wanted to align the minimum requirements more closely with the actual underlying economic risks to which banks are exposed  which should help allocate capital resources effectively. A third goal was to encourage banks to refine their measurement and management of risk over time. By creating incentives in the New Accord for banks to re-evaluate and enhance their tools constantly  we expect that banks themselves will adopt a forward-looking perspective on risk. I’m pleased to say that  through the Committee’s efforts and the cooperation and support of other supervisors and the industry  it appears that the proposed framework will attain each goal. We can now count them among the milestones we've achieved. However  though we have covered quite a bit of territory over the past three years  the last miles of any marathon are the toughest to finish. I’d like to turn now to the status of the New Accord and of the issues we are still resolving. Since the Second Consultative Document’s release 21 months ago  the members of the Basel Committee have worked collaboratively and publicly with supervisors  banks  and others to revise the proposals so that they best serve the needs of modern banking. We’ve published and discussed thousands of pages of proposals and studies with the industry and the public. I’d like to share with you the latest news on how we are resolving the key challenges and concerns that have surfaced in this process. One general issue raised is that the New Accord’s increased sensitivity to risk will reinforce procyclical behavior by banks  leading to increased cost of credit during cyclical downturns. While we are working to address this concern  I would note that banks already are expected to operate above minimum capital requirements  manage to their economic capital needs  and evaluate how their risk profiles may change over time. Along those lines  the Committee recently agreed that banks adopting the "internal ratings based" approach to credit risk will be required to conduct appropriate credit risk stress testing  which should help to contain procyclical behavior. Another concern raised about Basel II is its complexity. If the New Accord is to be more risk- sensitive  however  it must involve an irreducible degree of complexity  which parallels the changes in bank practices and market instruments. Indeed  some of this complexity stems from the various options the New Accord provides to address the wide range of risk profiles  strategies  and systems that banks maintain. The treatment of operational risk has been a more specific area of concern. While operational risk cannot be quantified with the same degree of precision as credit or market risk  the Committee believes that introducing a separate charge for operational risk will bolster efforts to find better ways to address it. In this vein  we have seen encouraging progress in operational risk measurement  although we recognize that the industry has not settled on particular methodologies or principles. Accordingly  the New Accord will permit an unprecedented amount of flexibility to accommodate a spectrum of approaches to BIS Review 61/2002 5 operational risk. Toward that end  under the "advanced measurement approach " the most sophisticated institutions will be free to experiment with a great variety of methodologies. The Basel Committee expects that we will achieve our goal of not raising in aggregate the capitalization required of the banking industry  though clearly and appropriately those banks that engage in higher risk businesses may see their requirements rise  and vice versa. G To help ensure this  the Committee launched its third Quantitative Impact Study on October 1  2002  involving  to date  265 banks from nearly 50 countries. The banks will assess how the proposals will affect them and submit their findings by December 20  2002. These results will allow us to ascertain the need for adjustments prior to the release of an updated proposal for public comment in the second quarter of 2003  followed by finalization of the New Accord in the fourth quarter of 2003  and implementation at year-end 2006. While much work clearly remains to be done over the next three years - including evaluating banks' readiness  training supervisory staff  and working towards consistent implementation across supervisors - in my view  both the journey and the ultimate destination of a New Accord will contribute substantially to a more resilient international financial system. Unfortunately  while there is a deepening consensus on key elements about how to promote resilience ex ante  there is no comparable degree of consensus on how best to handle international financial crises once they do erupt  or the proper roles of public institutions and the private sector in containing and resolving such crises. Notwithstanding considerable efforts at the public and private level to search for a better way  no magic bullet or formula has been found  although at times some have been asserted. Nor is one likely to be available. Experience and a reading of the historical record suggest that the seductive allure of grand solutions must be resisted. Cases differ greatly with respect to what is possible and desirable in terms of their implications for the interests of the public and private sectors. Moreover  history tells us that new developments in markets and practices quickly will render obsolete those measures that might seem well attuned to today’s circumstances. Allow me to explain how I think progress can be made by first focusing a bit on the problem that confronts us. I would like to highlight some of the important changes that have taken place over the past two decades in the patterns and instrumentation of capital flows to the emerging world  and in the nature of crises that can arise associated with these flows. G G G G flows since 1990  the predominance of private-to-private First  it is important to keep in mind that the constellation of investors and the range of instrumentation have broadened considerably over the past two decades. Equity investors (both direct and portfolio) are now the principal source of net inflows for emerging market countries  and most medium-term debt is held in tradable form by a broad array of diversified  well-capitalized  fixed-income investors. Second  there have been equally important changes in the destination of flows. Reflecting today sovereign foreign debt often represents only a relatively small part of maturing debt in crisis cases. Most maturing debt is owed by private borrowers and/or is locally issued. Third  the context has been fundamentally altered by broad institutional change. Accounting  regulatory  technological  communications  and structural market changes have fostered an environment characterized by mark-to-market accounting and much more liquid and actively managed balance sheets. Investors are focused on financial performance  and on their fiduciary responsibilities to their largely private clients and shareholders  rather than on long-term strategic relationships with sovereigns. Today this is as true for banks  which remain important providers of credit  as it is for other providers of capital. Last  the new environment entails new and complex linkages - - between domestic and international markets  and within and across countries - - reflecting the internationalization of local banking  equity  debt  and currency markets  and the greater complexity of funding structures. BIS Review 61/2002 6 G G G This new environment has important implications for policymakers and market participants alike. Let me comment on just a few: On the negative side  crises are more complex and unfold much more quickly and with surprising dimensions. Variable and often highly interdependent cross-market developments are often critical in the evolution of a given case and its implications for others. Indeed  many of the more recent crises were triggered by problems in domestic banking  currency  and debt markets that then spread to the capital account. Also  in today’s environment  the fear of an event often is the event itself  because of the inherent tendency of markets to anticipate developments and overreact. But on the positive side  financial recoveries can proceed more rapidly in today’s environment  particularly with the right policy responses from borrowers. In part  this reflects the fact that today’s market participants generally have the capacity - - and many have little choice  under mark-to-market accounting - - to digest losses and move on. The broader sourcing of capital today also gives more scope to the possibility that  while some investors may withdraw  others may take their place. The caveat here is that the well not be poisoned through unnecessarily broad or heavy-handed approaches  a point I will return to later. What is the right way to deal with this changed and changing environment? In my view  the solution is neither a single piece of financial engineering nor a compact between the official lenders and private creditors. Rather  it is a process incorporating a number of elements. Essentially  I would suggest that our current case-by-case approach to crisis management needs to evolve in ways that are market-based and adaptive  yet strategic  creative  and principled. Being successful in today’s environment requires adapting to the particularities of the case at hand  as well as the global financial and economic context  and requires seeking  as far as possible  to work with the grain of a given situation. The approach needs to be market- based  in part because that is what the game is all about. Today  the relevant considerations for crisis management relate more to markets and the problem of restoring market confidence  than to individual borrowers and creditors. G G G To the extent that systemic concerns pertain  they more often relate to the risks of market disruption and over-adjustment than to potential domino effects caused by the failure or impairment of key institutions. Also  in today’s environment  a market- based approach is much more feasible  because financial recoveries can proceed more rapidly than in the past. To be more specific  in my view  although much has been made of the difficulties in achieving debtor workouts  the truly thorny issues associated with emerging market financial crises usually relate to the following: containing the fallout to domestic financial systems and to local consumer and investor confidence  minimizing contagion and spillovers to other cases and markets  maintaining or restoring market access  particularly for private sector borrowers  and  most importantly  encouraging policy reform so that a given crisis falls as closely as possible to the liquidity  rather than the solvency  end of the spectrum. Working with the grain means recognizing the realities and limitations inherent in the current market structure and its functioning  and tailoring approaches to the specifics of individual cases. This involves acknowledging that attempts to impose solutions from outside are unrealistic and potentially counterproductive. Instead it involves identifying ways to induce and encourage desired behaviors. I would also suggest that it means avoiding departures from normal market functioning whenever possible. Interventions should seek not to override or suspend market functioning  but rather to guide market processes. BIS Review 61/2002 7 This is not to say that payment suspensions always can and should be avoided  or that ever-larger bailouts are desirable or feasible. I would note that we at the New York Fed in numerous instances  spanning several decades  have worked to help borrowers and creditors find mutually beneficial solutions that involved some degree of concerted or coordinated financing. But in such instances  when payment interruptions or resort to concerted financing truly are unavoidable  experience has shown that minimalist approaches - - where only certain payments are suspended or delayed  and only when absolutely necessary - - generally offer the best prospects for minimizing spillover effects and for restoring market access rapidly. G The linchpin of a market-based  minimalist approach has to be a strong policy response on the part of the country in crisis. Markets may not always be reasonable  but they usually have reasons for reacting adversely. Those reasons most often relate to policy or institutional shortcomings. Across all of the episodes of market distress in the emerging world over the past two decades  an essential element of heading off or minimizing damage from a crisis has been policymakers showing that they "get the message" about the need for reform  and are prepared to take appropriate measures. In this regard  the comparative advantage of the international public sector is in guiding economic and financial policy  and fostering the conditions that will facilitate the restoration or maintenance of voluntary credit and investment flows. IMF support should provide an unambiguous signal of the international community’s confidence in the capacity of crisis-affected countries to take the measures necessary to restore economic health. This role is particularly important in unfolding crisis situations  because borrowing country authorities too often are slow to recogni